Title: Finding the Joys in JavaScript

Subtitle: That time I tried to talk about Meta Structure

Tags: Coding Concepts, JavaScript, Learning

Datetime: 2015-03-31 19:47:06+00:00

Live: True

Content:

I recently made a site that used JavaScript as it's primary means of
loading new pages. The aim was to create a working mock up of a mobile
app, so the round trip time of getting a new page was too slow, as
this needed to emulate screen transitions of an app. So I needed a way
of inserting new HTML, populated with data. For this I used
[Handlebars](http://handlebarsjs.com), which offered a simple,
straightforward, well-documented way of templating with JavaScript.

This gave me a surprisingly positive experience with a JS project. I
think this is because it did one job, which neatly covered what I
needed it do to. Which was in stark contrast to the playing I had done
with some other, more MVC-style JavaScript frameworks, which seemed so
monolithic, and so bloated - though I should clarify that I have never
been the whole-nine-yards with a JavaScript framework, just toy
projects.

Which got me thinking about why Handlebars felt easy, but Angular just
felt stressful. I think this has to be because Handlebars worked in
addition to my preexisting JS knowledge, it didn't jump in and try to
make the simple things complicated.

Which is similar to everyone's favourite JavaScript library: jQuery,
which just gives you some useful extra things for your toolbelt, but
doesn't get all up in your business.

This is basically the Unix principle. Simple, easy to understand
tools, that do one job. But I found myself thinking about it a little
differently, because it's more about mixing at source code level,
rather than combing tools. So I thought about it like the "favour
composition over inheritance" idiom, but applied at a higher
level. Something like Angular felt very nested, where the depth just
made it hard to wrangle. Tools like Handlebars and jQuery sit nicely
next to each other, and are nicely orthogonal.

I would love for JavaScript to gain more of these simple tools, and
let go off the focus on the revolving door of frameworks, of nothing
else so that tools can actually stick around and not be a flash in the
pan, that takes so long to learn, and teaches so little.
